
--- Page 1 ---
Data Structure  
1 
 
UNIT I 
 
 
Introduction to queues: 
Queue Data Structure is a linear data structure that follows FIFO (First In First 
Out) Principle, so the first element inserted is the first to be popped out. In this article, we 
will cover all the basics of Queue, Operations on Queue, its implementation, advantages, 
disadvantages which will help you solve all the problems based on Queue. 
 
 
 
Operations on queues: 
 
Some of the basic operations for Queue in Data Structure are: 
 
 Enqueue: Adds (or stores) an element to the end of the queue.. 
 Dequeue: Removal of elements from the queue. 
 Peek or front: Acquires the data element available at t he front node of the queu e 
without deleting it. 
 rear: This operation returns the element at the rear end without removing it. 
 isFull: Validates if the queue is full. 
 isEmpty: Checks if the queue is empty. 
There are a few supporting operations (auxiliary operations): 
 
Queues: Introduction –Operations on queues –Circular Queues –Other types Queue – 
Application of Linear queues: Time sharing system –Linked Lists: Introduction –Singly 
linked lists - Circularly linked lists - Doubly Linked Lists – Application of Linked Li st-
Polynomial addition. 

--- Page 2 ---
Data Structure  
2 
 
1. Enqueue Operation in Queue Data Structure:  
Enqueue() operation in Queue adds (or stores) an element to the end of the queue. 
The following steps should be taken to enqueue (insert) data into a queue: 
 
Step 1: Check if the queue is full. 
Step 2: If the queue is full, return overflow error and exit. 
Step 3: If the queue is not full, increment the rear pointer to point to the next empty space. 
Step 4: Add the data element to the queue location, where the rear is pointing. 
Step 5: return success. 
 
Circular Queues: 
A Circular Queue is an extended version of a  normal queue where the last element 
of the queue is connected to the first element of the queue forming a circle.  The operations 
are performed based on FIFO (First In First Out) principle. It is also called  ‘Ring Buffer’.  
  
 
In a normal Queue, we can insert elements until queue becomes full. But once queue 
becomes full, we can not insert the next element even if there is a space in front of queue.  
Operations on Circular Queue:  
 Front: Get the front item from the queue.  
 Rear: Get the last item from the queue.  
--- Page 3 ---
Data Structure  
3 
 
 enQueue(value) This function is used to insert an element into the circular 
queue. In a circular queue, the new eleme nt is always inserted at the rear 
position.  
 Check whether the queue is full – [i.e., the rear end is in just before the 
front end in a circular mann er]. 
 If it is full then display Queue is full.   
 If the queue is not full then,  insert an element at the en d of the queue.  
 deQueue() This function is used to delete an element from the circular queue. In 
a circular queue, the element is always deleted from  the front position.   
 Check whether the queue is Empty.  
 If it is empty then display Queue is empty . 
 If the queue is not empty, then g et the last element and remove it from 
the queue. 
Other types Queue: 
A priority queue is an abstract data type that behaves  similarly to the normal queue 
except that each element has some priority, i.e., the element with the highest priority would 
come first in a priority q ueue. The priority of the elements in a priority queue will determine 
the order in which elements are removed from the priority queue. 
The priority queue supports only comparable elements, which means that the elements 
are either arranged in an ascending or descending order. 
For example, suppose we have some values like 1, 3, 4, 8, 14, 22 inserted in a priori ty 
queue with an ordering imposed on the values is from least to the greatest. Therefore, the 1 
number would be having the highest priority while 22 will be having the lowest priority. 
Characteristics of a Priority queue 
A priority queue is an extension of a queue that contains the following characteristics: 
o Every element in a priority queue has some priority associated with it. 
o An element with the high er priority will be deleted before the deletion of the lesser 
priority. 
--- Page 4 ---
Data Structure  
4 
 
o If two elements in a priority queue have the same priority, they will be arranged using 
the FIFO principle. 
Let's understand the priority queue through an example. 
We have a priority queue that contains the following values: 
1, 3, 4, 8, 14, 22 
All the values are arranged in ascending order . Now, we will observe how the priority 
queue will look after performing the following operations: 
o poll(): This function will remove the highest priority element from the priority queue. 
In the above priority queue, the '1' element has the highest priority , so it will be 
removed from the priority queue. 
o add(2): This function will insert '2' element in a priority queue. As 2 is the sm allest 
element among all the numbers so it will obtain the highest priority. 
o poll(): It will remove '2' element from the prior ity queue as it has the highest priority 
queue. 
o add(5): It will insert 5 element after 4 as 5 is larger than 4 and lesser than 8, so it will 
obtain the third highest priority in a priority queue. 
Types of Priority Queue 
There are two types of priority queue: 
Ascending order priority queue: In ascending order priority queue, a lower priority number 
is given as a higher priority in a priority. For example, we take the numbers from 1 to 5 
arranged in an ascending order like 1,2,3,4,5; therefore, the smallest number, i.e., 1 is given 
 
--- Page 5 ---
Data Structure  
5 
 
o Descending order priority queue: In descending order priority queue, a higher 
priority number is given as a higher priority in a priority. For example, we take the 
numbers from 1 to 5 arranged in descending order like 5, 4, 3, 2, 1; therefore, the 
largest number, i.e., 5 is given as the highest priority in a priority queue. 
 
o The priority queue by using the list given below in which  INFO list contains the data 
elements, PRN list contains the priority numbers of each data element available in 
the INFO list, and LINK basically contains the address of the next node. 
o 
  
 
 Application of Linear queues:  
1.  Task Scheduling: Queues can be used to schedule tasks based on priority or the 
order in which they were received.  
2.  Resource Allocation: Queues can be used to manage and allocate resources, 
such as printers or CPU processing time.  
3.  Batch Processing: Queues can be used to handle batch processing jobs, such as 
data analysis or image renderin g. 
4.  Message Buffering: Queues can be used to buffer messages in communication 
systems, such as message queues in messaging systems or buffers in computer 
networks. 
--- Page 6 ---
Data Structure  
6 
 
5. Event Handling: Queues can be used to handle events in event -driven systems, 
such as GUI applications or simulation systems.  
6. Traffic Management: Queues can be used to manage traffic flow in 
transportation systems, such as airport control systems or road networks.  
7. Operating systems: Operating systems often use queues to manage processes 
and resour ces. For example, a process scheduler might use a qu eue to manage 
the order in which processes are executed.  
8. Network protocols: Network protocols like TCP and UDP use queues to 
manage packets that are transmitted over the network. Queues can help to ensure  
that packets are delivered in the correct order and  at the appropriate rate.  
9. Printer queues :In printing systems, queues are used to manage the order in 
which print jobs are processed. Jobs are added to the queue as they are 
submitted, and the printer pro cesses them in the order they were received.  
10. Web servers: Web servers use queues to manage incoming requests from 
clients. Requests are added to the queue as they are received, and they are 
processed by the server in the order they were received.  
11. Breadth-first search algorithm: The breadth -first search algo rithm uses a 
queue to explore nodes in a graph level -by-level. The algorithm starts at a given 
node, adds its neighbors to the queue, and then processes each neighbor in turn.  
 
Time sharing system: 
The batched systems provide an environment where various system re sources were 
used effectively, but it did not provide for user interaction with computer systems. Time -
sharing is a logical extension of  multiprogramming. The CPU performs many tasks by 
switches that are so frequent that the user can interact with each program while it is 
running. A time -shared operating system allows multiple users to share computers 
simultaneously. With each action or order at a time the  shared system becomes smaller, so 
only a little CPU time is required for each user. As the system rapidly switches from one 
user to another, each user is given the impression that the entire computer system is 
dedicated to its use, although it is being sh ared among multiple users.   
A time-shared operating system uses CPU scheduling and  multi-programming to 
provide each user with a small portion  of a shared computer at once. Each user has at least 
one separate program in memory.  
--- Page 7 ---
Data Structure  
7 
 
A program is loaded into memory and executes, it performs a short period of time 
either before com pletion or to complete I/O. This short period of time during which the u ser 
gets the attention of the  CPU is known as  time slice, time slot, or quantum. It is typically 
of the order of 10 to 100 milliseconds.  
Time-shared operating systems are mo re complex than multiprogrammed operating 
systems. In both, multiple jobs must be kept in memory simultaneously, so the system must 
have memory management and security. To achieve a g ood response time, jobs may have to 
swap in and out of disk from the  main memory which now serves as a backing store for the 
main memory. A common method to achieve this goal is virtual memory,  a technique that 
allows the execution of a job that may not be completel y in memory.  
 
  
 In the above figure the user 5 is  active state but user 1, user 2, user 3, and user 4 
are in a waiting state whereas user 6 is in a  ready state. 
1. Active State – The user’s program is under the control of the CPU. Only one 
program is available in this state.  
2. Ready State – The user program is ready t o execute but it is waiting for its turn 
to get the CPU. More than one user can be in a ready state at a time.  
3. Waiting State – The user’s program is waiting for some input/out put operation. 
More than one user can be in a waiting state at a time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 8 ---
Data Structure  
8 
 
Introduction of Linked Lists:  
Linked List is basically chains of nodes where each node contains information such 
as data and a pointer to the next node in the chain. It is a popular data structure with a 
wide range of real-world applications. In this article, we will provide a complete 
introduction of Linked List, which will help you tackle any problem based on Linked List. 
 
Linked List is a linear data structure which looks like a series of nodes, where 
each node has two parts: data and next pointer. Unlike Arrays, Linked List elements are 
not stored at a contiguous location. In the linked list there is a head pointer, which points 
to the first element of the linked list, and if the list is empty then it simply points to null or 
nothing. 
 
Basic Terminologies of Linked List: 
 Head: The Head of a linked list is a pointer to the first node or reference of the 
first node of linked list. This pointer marks the beginning of the linked list. 
 Node: Linked List consists of a series of nodes where each node has two 
parts: data and next pointer. 
 Data: Data is the part of node which stores the information in the linked list. 
 Next pointer: Next pointer is the part of the node which points to the next node 
of the linked list. 
Importance of Linked List: 
Here are a few advantages of a linked list that is listed below, it will help you understand 
why it is necessary to know. 
 Dynamic Data structure: The size of memory can be allocated or de-allocated 
at run time based on the operation insertion or deletion. 
 Ease of Insertion/Deleti on: The insertion and deletion of elements are simpler 
than arrays since no elements need to be shifted after insertion and deletion, Just 
the address needed to be updated. 
 Efficient Memory Utilization: As we know Linked List is a dynamic data 
structure the size increases or decreases as per the requirement so this avoids the 
wastage of memory.  
 Implementation: Various advanced data structures can be implemented using a 
linked list like a stack, queue, graph, hash maps, etc. 
 
--- Page 9 ---
Data Structure  
9 
 
Singly linked lists: 
Singly Linked List is a type of linked list where each node has two 
parts: data and next pointer. The data part stores the information and the next pointer 
points to the next node of the linked list. The next pointer of the last node stores null as it is 
the last node of the linked list and there is no next node. Traversal of items can be done in 
the forward direction only due to the linking of every node to its next node. 
 
Node Definition of Singly linked list: 
SN Operation Description 
1 Insertion at 
beginning 
It involves inserting any element at the front of the list. We 
just need to a few link adjustments to make the new node as 
the head of the list. 
2 Insertion at end 
of the list 
It involves insertion at the last of the linked list. The new 
node can be inserted as the only node in the list or it can be 
inserted as the last one. Different logics a re implemented in 
each scenario. 
3 Insertion after 
specified node 
It involves insertion after the specified node of the linked list. 
We need to skip the desire d number of nodes in order to 
reach the node after which the new node will be inserted. . 
 
 
Circularly linked lists: 
The circular linked list is a linked list where all nodes are connected to form a 
circle. In a circular linked list, the first node and the last node are connected to each other 
which forms a circle. There is no NULL at the end. 
 
Circular linked list  
There are generally two types of circular linked lists: 
 Circular singly linked list: In a circular Singly linked list, the last node of the 
list contains a pointer to the first node of the list. We traverse the circular singly 
--- Page 10 ---
Data Structure  
10 
 
linked list until we reach the same node where we started. The circular singly 
linked list has no beginning or end. No null value is present in the next part of 
any of the nodes. 
 
Representation of Circular singly linked list  
 Circular Doubly linked list: Circular Doubly Linked List has properties of both 
doubly linked list and circular linked list in which two consecutive elements are 
linked or connected by the previous and next pointer and the last node points to 
the first node by the next pointer and also the first node points to the last node 
by the previous pointer. 
 
Representation of circular doubly linked list  
Note: We will be using the singly circular linked list to represent the working of the 
circular linked list. 
Representation of circular linked list: 
Circular linked lists are similar to single Linked Lists with the exception of connecting the 
last node to the first node. 
 
Doubly Linked Lists: 
Doubly linked list is a complex type of linked list in which a node contains a pointer 
to the previous as well as the next node in the sequence. Therefore, in a doubly linked list, a 
node consists of three parts: node data, pointer to the next no de in sequence (next pointer) , 
pointer to the previous node (previous pointer). A sample node in a doubly linked list is 
shown in the figure. 
--- Page 11 ---
Data Structure  
11 
 
1.  
 
A doubly linked list containing three nodes having numbers from 1 to 3 in their data part, 
is shown in the following image. 
 
 
In C, structure of a node in doubly linked list can be given as : 
1. struct node    
2. {   
3.     struct node *prev;    
4.     int data;   
5.     struct node *next;    
6. }    
The prev part of the first node and the  next part of the last node will always contain null 
indicating end in each direction. 
SN Operation Description 
1 Insertion at 
beginning 
Adding the node into the linked list at beginning. 
2 Insertion at end Adding the node into the linked list to the end. 
--- Page 12 ---
Data Structure  
12 
 
3 Insertion after 
specified node 
Adding the node into the linked list afte r the specified 
node. 
4 Deletion at beginning Removing the node from beginning of the list 
5 Deletion at the end Removing the node from end of the list. 
6 Deletion of the node 
having given data 
Removing the node which is present just afte r the node 
containing the given data. 
7 Searching Comparing each node data with the item to be searched 
and return the location of the item in the list if the item 
found else return null. 
8 Traversing Visiting each node of the list at least once in order to 
perform some specific operation like searching, sorting, 
display, etc. 
 
Application of Linked List: 
A linked list is a linear data structure, in which the elements are not stored at 
contiguous memory locations. The elements in a linked list are linked using pointers  as 
shown in the below image:   
 
Linked-List 
Applications of linked list in computer science: 
1. Implementation of  stacks and queues 
2. Implementation of graphs:  Adjacency list representation of graphs is the most 
popular which uses a linke d list to store adjacent vertices.  
3. Dynamic memory allocation: We use a linked list of free blocks.  
4. Maintaining a directory of names  
5. Performing arithmetic operations on long integers  
--- Page 13 ---
Data Structure  
13 
 
6. Manipulation of poly nomials by storing constants in the node of the linked  list 
7. Representing sparse matrices  
 
Polynomial addition: 
For adding polynomials vertically, we place the polynomials column -wise vertically. 
Hence, it is known as the vertical method of adding polynomia ls. Let's understand the steps 
below to add polynomials vertically. 
 Step 1: Write the polynomials in standard form. 
 Step 2:  Place the polynomials in a vertical arrangement, with the like terms 
placed one above the other in both the polynomials. 
 Step 3:  If any power term is missing in any polynomial, we write a '0' as 
its coefficient to avoid confusion in the column-wise arrangement. 
 Step 4: Perform the calculations by retaining the sign of the terms. 
 
Polynomials are algebraic expressions that consist of constants and variables of 
different powers. Adding polynomials is a way of combining and summing up terms having 
the same power. We will be learning about different methods of adding polynomials i n this 
article. 
Adding Polynomials Definition 
Adding polynomials is defined as the addition operation of polynomials. Pol ynomials 
are algebraic expressions of different degrees. While adding polynomials we follow some 
specific rules which makes it very simple to do the operation. 
Rules of Adding Polynomials 
Look at the two important rules of adding polynomials given below: 
 Rule 1: The like terms are always combined and added. Unlike terms can never 
be added. 
 Rule 2: While adding the terms, the sign always remains the same. 
Before learning the method of addi ng polynomials, let us first quickly go through the 
meanings of like terms and unlike terms in any polynomial. 
 
 
--- Page 14 ---
Data Structure  
14 
 
 
Example:   
Input: 
     1st number = 5x2 + 4x1 + 2x0 
     2nd number = -5x1 - 5x0 
Output: 
        5x2-1x1-3x0 
Input: 
     1st number = 5x3 + 4x2 + 2x0 
     2nd number = 5x^1 - 5x^0 
Output: 
        5x3 + 4x2 + 5x1 - 3x0 
 
 